Appendix B

A Step-by-Step Guide to Changing the
Front Oil Seals on the Volvo B-230 Engine
When replacing the timing belt, check to see that there are no oil leaks around any of the pulleys.
If no leaks, you may skip oil seal replacement. The standard recommendation is to replace the oil
seals every other time the timing belt is changed. Some people replace everything as a matter of
course, every time. It’s up to you.
Keep old timing belt for use per Figure B2 and B3.
This guide is for those of you who have chosen to replace the front oil seals.

Oil seals from a Volvo dealer are expensive. IPD
(www.ipdusa.com) sells oil seals that are reasonably priced.
And, so far, they have worked for me.

Figure B1. At the same time that you’re loosening the crankshaft bolt (using the
Volvo 5284 crankshaft holder tool), loosen
the 17 mm bolt (arrow) on the overhead
camshaft.

Figure B2. Or, if you forgot, you can grip both
sides (arrows) of the old belt near the tensioner with large pliers. Simultaneously, use a
long-handled wrench to break free the 17
mm bolt.

© 2008 by Frederick Su.
All rights reserved.
A bytewrite LLC publication.

page B1

Figure B3. Similarly for the intermediate
shaft bolt. Hold the old belt tight with large
pliers while breaking the 17 mm bolt free.

Figure B4. Both the overhead camshaft and
intermediate shaft gears are keyed and can
only go on one way. You may wish to mark
each with an “o” and “i,” respectively, to distinguish them.

Figure B5. Gently pry around perimeter of
both the overhead camshaft and intermediate
shaft gears using a flat-bladed screwdriver.
Pull pulleys off.

page B2

Figure B6. Pulleys off. (a) Overhead camshaft,
with 2 mm thick spacer. (b) Intermediate
shaft, no spacer. Pay attention if your engine
has spacers behind the overhead camshaft
and intermediate shaft pulleys. Some cars
don’t.

(a)

(b)

(c)
(b)

(a)
crankshaft

Figure B7. The crankshaft pulley should
already have been removed. Now, slide off
the front crankshaft shim [arrow (a), which
has two notches, one on the outer circumference for marking Top Dead Center (TDC) and
one on the inner circumference for locking
onto the knob of the crankshaft pulley boss
(b)]. The rear crankshaft shim (c) does not
lock onto anything. Note that for both shims,
the concave sides face away from the timing
belt. All three pieces should slide off the
crankshaft easily. (Well, you might have to
pry the pulley boss off gently with small flatbladed screwdriver.)

page B3

(a)
(b)

Figure B8. Front of crankshaft pulley boss.
Arrow (a) points to ridge that locks onto
groove in crankshaft. Arrow (b) is the knob
where front crankshaft shim and crankshaft
pulley locks onto.

Figure B9. This photo shows all three shafts
with the pulleys off. Pull off the back plate to
expose the overhead camshaft seal.
back plate

Figure B10. Pry out the overhead camshaft
seal with a small flat-bladed screwdriver. Do
the same for the intermediate shaft seal and
crankshaft seal.

page B4

Figure B11. Clean all shaft and related surfaces, including recesses where the seals sit,
with solvent. Clean front of engine. Clean
back plate. Deburr any rough shaft and
recess surfaces with very fine sandpaper.
Wipe clean.

Figure B12. The front surface of the seal is
solid while the back is grooved. Rub Vaseline
petroleum jelly on the inner circumference
of each seal. For the outer circumference,
put a spot of oil on a dry cloth. Then, use
that cloth to lightly coat the outer circumference. The petroleum jelly will ensure that
the shaft-to-seal surface is lubricated on
engine start-up until normal engine oil gets
there. The lightly oiled outer circumference
will help in pressing the seal into the recess.
Figure B13. (a) Press each seal in by hand as
far as possible. The seal should not seat by
hand pressure alone. If it does, you’ve got
too much oil on the outer circumference.
Next, I fashioned a small piece of wood (b),
whose contact end was carved down to fit
the seal. I used a regular hammer to pound
on the opposite end of the wood. Be sure to
tap diagonally across from the previous spot.
If the seal doesn’t move in when tapping,
then you haven’t put enough oil on the outer
circumference. Set the seal in about 1.5 mm
from the front edge of lip. Use your finger to
feel around the recess for high points.

(a)

(b)
seal
contact
end
page B5

(b)

(a)

Figure B14. Photos of new seals installed on
(a) overhead camshaft, (b) intermediate shaft,
and (c) crankshaft.

(c)

notch

knob

Figure B15. Put on the rear crankshaft shim,
crankshaft pulley boss (with knob showing in
front), and front crankshaft shim, as shown.
The pulley boss has a ridge (see Figure B8)
that aligns to the groove in the crankshaft.
Remember, the concave sides of the shims
face away from the timing belt (otherwise
the shims will rub against the belt). Also note
that the u-shaped notch (arrow, for aligning
TDC) of the front shim is opposite the knob
(arrow) on the pulley boss.

Tightening torque
• overhead camshaft bolt: 37 ft-lbs.
• intermediate shaft bolt: 37 ft-lbs.

page B6

Figure B16. Once the new seals are installed,
place the clean back plate in position, as
shown.

Figure B17. Install the overhead camshaft
gear and intermediate shaft gear as shown,
making sure the notch on back of each gear
is locked onto the cylindrical key. Install the
pulley bolts finger tight. You will need to set
up resistance in order to properly torque the
bolts.

Figure B18. Install the tensioner roller. Slip
on the old timing belt over all the pulleys.
Use the large pliers to hold both the underside and upper side of the old belt as shown
while you torque the intermediate shaft bolt
to 37 ft-lbs. You can also torque the overhead camshaft bolt now using the same
technique, or you can wait to do the overhead camshaft bolt when the crankshaft pulley holder is in place. Slip old timing belt off.

page B7

Figure B19. (a) Make sure that notch of lower
left side of the back plate slips over the metal
lip near crankshaft, as shown. Note hole
(arrow) for 10 mm, 1.5" long bolt.
(b) This shows lower right side of back plate.
Note hole (arrow) where the 12 mm, 1.5"
long bolt goes. Refer to Figure 12 in 740 timing belt guide.

(a)

(b)

All the front seals are now set. The overhead camshaft gear and intermediate shaft gear are in
place, as well as the crankshaft pulley boss and shims. The intermediate shaft bolt has been
torqued properly. The overhead camshaft bolt may or may not have been torqued yet. If not, be
sure to torque it to 37 ft-lbs when you set up the crankshaft pulley holder to torque the crankshaft bolt.
This ends the instructions for replacing the front seals.
Go to Figure 15, in the main guide, to complete installation of the new timing belt.

Thanks go to the tech guys at IPD for some help with questions about seal replacement.

page B8

