F - BASIC TESTING
1994 Volvo 960

1994 ENGINE PERFORMANCE
Volvo Basic Diagnostic Procedures
Volvo;

850, 940, 960

INTRODUCTION
The following diagnostic steps will help prevent overlooking
a simple problem. This is also where to begin diagnosis for a no-start
condition.
The first step in diagnosing any driveability problem is verifying the
customer complaint with a test drive under the conditions the problem
reportedly occurred.
Before entering self-diagnostics, perform a careful and
complete visual inspection. Most engine control problems result from
mechanical breakdowns, poor electrical connections or
damaged/misrouted vacuum hoses. Before condemning the computerized
system, perform each test listed in this article.
NOTE:

Perform all voltage tests using a Digital Volt-Ohmmeter
(DVOM) with a minimum 10-megohm input impedance, unless
otherwise instructed in test procedure.

PRELIMINARY INSPECTION & ADJUSTMENTS
VISUAL INSPECTION
Visually inspect all electrical wiring. Look for chafed,
stretched, cut or pinched wiring. Ensure electrical connectors fit
tightly and are not corroded. Ensure vacuum hoses are properly routed
and not pinched or cut. See M - VACUUM DIAGRAMS article in the
ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section to verify routing and connections (if
necessary). Inspect air induction system for possible vacuum leaks.

MECHANICAL INSPECTION
Compression
Check engine mechanical condition using a compression gauge,
vacuum gauge or engine analyzer. See engine analyzer manual for
specific instructions.
WARNING: Do not use ignition switch during compression
tests on fuel injected vehicles. Use a remote
starter to crank engine. Fuel injectors on
many models are triggered by ignition switch
during cranking mode, which can create a fire
hazard or contaminate engine oiling system.
COMPRESSION SPECIFICATIONS TABLE



Application

Specification

Compression Pressure (Minimum)
850
Non-Turbo ............. 189-219 psi (13.2-15.3
Turbo ..................... 156-185 psi (11-13
940 ............................... 128 psi (9
960 .............................. 184 psi (13



kg/cm 
kg/cm 
kg/cm 
kg/cm

)
)
)
)


Exhaust System Backpressure
1) Exhaust system can be checked using a vacuum or pressure
gauge. Remove oxygen sensor or air injection check valve (if
equipped).
2) Connect a 1-10 psi pressure gauge, and run engine at 2500
RPM. If exhaust system backpressure is greater than 1 3/4-2 psi,
exhaust system or catalytic converter is plugged.
3) If using a vacuum gauge, connect vacuum gauge hose to
intake manifold vacuum port and start engine. Observe vacuum gauge.
Open throttle part way and hold steadily. If vacuum gauge reading
slowly drops after stabilizing, exhaust system should be checked for a
restriction.

FUEL SYSTEM
WARNING: Always relieve fuel pressure before
disconnecting any fuel injection-related
component. DO NOT allow fuel to contact
engine or electrical components.

FUEL PRESSURE
Fuel Pressure
1) Before disconnecting, cover fuel line connector using shop
towel to absorb any fuel spray. Connect Fuel Pressure Gauge (5011)
between fuel line and fuel rail. Seal free end of hose using Plug
(5266) or use Fuel Drainage Unit (981 2270, 2273 and 2282).
2) On 940, lift out central electrical unit behind ashtray
and remove system relay. See Fig. 1. On 850, lift cover on central
electrical unit located in engine compartment and remove fuel pump
relay. See Fig. 2. On 940, connect a jumper wire between relay
terminals No. 30 and 87/2. See Fig. 3.
3) On 850, connect a jumper wire between relay terminals No.
1 and 3. See Fig. 4. On 960, remove fuel injection fuses No. 30 and
31. See Fig. 5. Connect jumper wire between fuse terminals No. 30 and
31.
4) On all models, turn ignition on. Fuel pump should start.
Fuel filler cover can be removed to determine whether main pump
 is
operating. Fuel pressure should be about 43.5 psi (3.06 kg/cm ). If
pressure is too low, pinch return hose by hand and check whether
pressure rises. DO NOT allow pressure to exceed 86 psi (6 kg/cm ).
5) If pressure rises rapidly, pump and lines are okay.
Replace pressure regulator and recheck line pressure. If pressure
rises slowly, fuel filter, fuel pump strainer or fuel lines are
blocked. If pressure does not rise, fuel pump is probably faulty.
6) If pressure is too high, remove jumper wire between relay
or fuse terminals. Remove return hose from pressure regulator, and
blow in pipe. Remove vacuum hose from pressure regulator, and blow in
pipe. If both hoses are open, pressure regulator is defective. Replace
regulator, and recheck pressure.

Fig. 1: Locating Fuel System Relay (940)
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.

Fig. 2: Locating Fuel Pump Relay (850)
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.

Fig. 3: Identifying Fuel Injection System Relay Terminals (940)
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.

Fig. 4: Identifying Fuel Pump Relay Terminals (850)
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.

Fig. 5: Identifying Fuel Pump Fuses (960)
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.
Fuel Pump Circuit (940)
1) Remove fuel injection system relay. Check voltage at
terminal No. 30. See Figs. 1 and 3. If battery voltage does not exist,
repair wiring between relay connector and battery.
2) Connect jumper wire between terminals No. 30 and 87/2 of
fuel injection system relay connector. Fuel pump should run. If fuel
pump does not run, check wiring between pump and relay. Also check

wiring between terminals No. 87/1 and 85 for continuity. Repair as
necessary.
NOTE:

ECU terminal identifications are marked on unit or connector.

CAUTION: Ignition must be off when connecting or disconnecting ECU
connector.
Fuel Pump Circuit (850)
1) If fuel pump does not operate with ignition on, remove
fuel pump relay. See Fig. 2. Connect jumper wire between fuel pump
relay terminals No. 1 and 3. See Fig. 4. Turn ignition on. If fuel
pump does not start, go to next step. If fuel pump starts, replace
fuel pump relay.
2) Turn ignition off. To check relay ground, connect ohmmeter
between ground and fuel pump relay terminal No. 2. See Fig. 4.
Ohmmeter should indicate about zero ohms. If ohmmeter does not
indicate about zero ohms, check wiring between fuel pump relay and
ground.
3) To check fuel pump relay voltage supply, connect voltmeter
between ground and fuel pump relay terminal No. 1. See Fig. 4. Turn
ignition on. Battery voltage should be present. If battery voltage is
not present, check wiring between fuel pump relay and fuse No. 2.
4) Turn ignition off. Connect ohmmeter between ground and
relay terminal No. 3. See Fig. 4. About 1.5 ohms should be present. If
about 1.5 ohms are not present, check resistance at fuel pump
connector to determine whether fault is in pump or wiring.
5) To check fuel injection control signal to fuel pump relay,
connect voltmeter between ground and fuel pump relay terminal No. 4.
See Fig. 4. Operate starter motor. If voltmeter indicates about 3
volts, replace relay.
6) If voltage is not to specification, check wiring between
fuel pump relay and ECU. If wiring is okay, see ELECTRONIC CON-TROL
UNIT - IGNITION (850) in I - SYSTEM/COMPONENT TESTS article in the
ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section.
Fuel Pump Circuit (960)
If fuel pumps do not operate with ignition on, connect
Breakout Box (999-3070) to ECU. See Fig. 6. Connect voltmeter between
terminals No. 3 and 19. Voltmeter should indicate battery voltage. If
battery voltage is not present, check wiring and voltage supply to
pump relay. If voltage is present, check wiring and voltage supply to
fuel pump.

Fig. 6:

Connecting Breakout Box To ECU
(960 Shown; 850 Is Similar)
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.

Injection System (Fuel Pump) Relay (940)
With ECU connector removed from ECU, ground ECU connector
terminals No. 17 and 21. Pump relay should activate fuel pumps and
pumps should start operating. Connect voltmeter between ground and
terminal 87/2 in relay. See Fig. 3. Battery voltage should be present.
Disconnect ground leads from ECU terminals No. 17 and 21. Replace
relay if faulty.

IGNITION CHECKS
BENDIX REX-I
NOTE:

ECU terminal identifications are marked on unit or connector.

940 Non-Turbo (Federal)
1) Ensure ground connections from ignition ECU and power
stage to inlet manifold ground are okay. If ground connections are
good, disconnect a spark plug wire from spark plug. Attach a test
spark plug to disconnected spark plug wire, and ground spark plug.
Crank engine, and monitor spark.
2) Strong Blue/White spark indicates engine or fuel system
malfunction. If no or weak spark is present, reconnect spark plug wire
to spark plug. Disconnect coil wire from distributor cap, and install
test spark plug. Crank engine, and monitor spark. If no or weak spark
is present, coil or ignition system primary circuit is defective.
3) If a strong Blue/White spark is present, check ignition
rotor, distributor housing and spark plug wires. Replace components as
necessary. If previous steps do not show defective components, go to
next step.
4) Turn ignition off. Reconnect disconnected components.
Ensure all connectors are secure and properly connected. With ignition
off, remove panel from lower left dashboard and disconnect ignition
ECU connector. Remove dust cover from connector. Ensure all pin
connection sleeves are at same height.
5) Measure voltage at ignition ECU connector terminal No. 5.
Voltage reading should be about 12 volts. If voltage is not present,
check circuit between ignition ECU and fuse holder.
6) Turn ignition on. Open diagnostic connector at left rear
of engine compartment, and connect test lead to socket No. 6 (marked
on unit). See Fig. 7. Measure voltage at ignition ECU connector
terminal No. 1. Voltage should be about 12 volts. Press test button on
diagnostic unit. Voltage should now be zero volts. If voltage is not
present at control unit or is 12 volts with button pushed, measure
voltage at diagnostic unit connector.

Fig. 7: Identifying Diagnostic Unit Components
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.
7) Measure voltage at diagnostic unit connector Blue lead.

Voltage should be about 12 volts. Using ohmmeter, check continuity
between diagnostic unit connector Black lead and ground. Ensure
continuity exists.
8) Turn ignition off. Check continuity between diagnostic
unit test lead and pin No. 8 (under function selector button).
Ohmmeter should indicate infinity. Press test button on diagnostic
unit. Continuity should now be present.
9) Using ohmmeter, test for continuity of diagnostic unit
LED. Connect ohmmeter leads to pin under LED and to test lead.
Continuity should exist in only one direction.
10) Turn ignition on. Measure voltage at ignition ECU
terminal No. 6 (Blue wire). Voltage should be about 12 volts. Turn
ignition off. Using ohmmeter, check continuity between ignition ECU
connector terminals No. 20 (Brown wire) and No. 14 (Black wire).
Continuity should exist.
11) Measure resistance between ground and ignition ECU
connector terminal No. 2 (Red/Black wire). See COOLANT TEMPERATURE
SENSOR RESISTANCE table. If reading is not correct, test sensor
directly to determine if fault is in sensor or wiring.
COOLANT TEMPERATURE SENSOR RESISTANCE TABLE





Temperature

F ( C)

Ohms

-22 (-30) ............................... 30,000
-4 (-20) ......................... 15,000-16,000
32 (0) ............................... 5800-6000
68 (20) .............................. 2200-2400
104 (40) ............................... 1000-1200
140 (60) ..................................... 600
176 (80) ................................. 340-360
212 (100) ................................ 180-190
248 (120) .............................. 100-120



12) Check continuity between ignition ECU connector terminal
No. 7 (Orange wire) and ground. Ensure continuity exists. Depress
accelerator until throttle switch opens slightly. Ohmmeter reading
should increase to infinity. If reading is not correct, measure
throttle switch resistance directly to determine if fault is in switch
or wiring. Adjust throttle switch if necessary. See D - ADJUSTMENTS
article in the ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section.
13) Remove panel under right side of dash, at right side of
bulkhead. Remove glove box. Turn ignition off. Disconnect fuel
injection ECU connector. Check for continuity between ignition ECU
terminal No. 8 (Yellow wire) and fuel injection ECU terminal No. 25
(Yellow wire). If continuity is not present, check connectors and
wiring. Repair as necessary. If continuity is still not present,
internal fault is present in an ECU. Reconnect fuel injection ECU
connector, and replace glove box and panel.
14) Check P/M (pulse) generator by measuring resistance
between ignition ECU terminals No. 10 (Red wire) and No. 23 (Blue
wire). Resistance should be 215-265 ohms. Ensure shield is connected
to ECU terminal No. 11.
15) Disconnect knock sensor connector, and place a jumper
wire between terminals. Check continuity between ignition ECU
terminals No. 12 (Black wire) and No. 13 (Green wire). Ohmmeter should
show continuity. Ensure resistance to ground is infinity. If
resistance is too high (infinity), remove jumper wire and test each
wiring lead. If leads are intact, replace knock sensor.
16) Reconnect knock sensor connector. Reassemble and
reconnect ignition ECU connector.
17) Disconnect connectors from ignition coil and power stage.

Remove mounting screws and lift ignition coil from power stage.
Measure resistance across low tension side of ignition coil.
Resistance should be about .5 ohm.
18) Measure resistance between high tension terminal and each
low tension terminal. Resistance should be about 5000 ohms. If
resistance is not as specified, replace ignition coil.
19) Turn ignition on. Check for battery voltage at Blue wire
of 3-pin power stage connector. If voltage is low or does not exist,
check power supply lead connections at ignition ECU and ignition
coil/power stage. Ensure voltage does not drop to less than 10.5 volts
while engine is cranking. Turn ignition off.
20) Ensure ground is present at Brown/Black wire of 3-pin
power stage connector and at Black wire of 2-pin power stage
connector. Using a self-powered test light or buzzer, check for
continuity between Orange wire of 2-pin power stage connector and
ignition ECU terminal No. 16.
21) If no defects are found in previous steps or engine still
malfunctions after repairs, install new ignition ECU. Recheck system
as necessary. Reinstall ignition coil. Reassemble ignition ECU
connector, and reconnect it to ECU. Reconnect ignition coil/power
stage connectors.

BOSCH EZ116K
NOTE:

ECU terminal identifications are marked on unit or connector.

940
1) Ensure ground connections from ignition ECU and power
stage to inlet manifold ground are okay. If ground connections are
good, disconnect a spark plug wire from spark plug. Connect a test
spark plug to disconnected spark plug wire, and ground spark plug.
Crank engine, and monitor spark.
2) A strong Blue/White spark indicates engine or fuel system
malfunction. If no or weak spark is present, reconnect spark plug wire
to spark plug. Disconnect coil wire from distributor cap, and install
test spark plug. Crank engine, and monitor spark. If no spark or weak
spark is present, coil or ignition system primary circuit is
defective.
3) If a strong Blue/White spark is present, check ignition
rotor, distributor housing and spark plug wires. Replace components as
necessary. If previous steps show no defective components, go to next
step.
4) Turn ignition off. Reconnect disconnected components.
Ensure all connectors are secure and properly connected. With ignition
off, remove panel from lower left dashboard and disconnect ignition
ECU connector. Remove dust cover from connector. Ensure all ECU pin
connection sleeves are at same height.
5) Measure voltage at ignition ECU connector terminal No. 5.
Voltage should be about 12 volts. If voltage is not present, check
circuit between ignition ECU and fuse holder.
6) Turn ignition on. Open diagnostic connector at left rear
of engine compartment, and connect test lead to socket No. 6 (marked
on unit). See Fig. 7. Measure voltage at ignition ECU connector
terminal No. 1. Voltage should be about 12 volts. Press test button on
diagnostic unit. Voltage should now be zero volt. If voltage is not
present at control unit or if voltmeter reads 12 volts with button
pushed, measure voltage at diagnostic unit connector.
7) Measure voltage at diagnostic unit connector Blue lead.
Voltage should be about 12 volts. Using ohmmeter, check continuity
between diagnostic connector Black lead and ground. Continuity should
exist.
8) Turn ignition off. Check continuity between diagnostic
test lead and pin No. 8 (under function selector button). Ohmmeter

should read infinity. Press button on diagnostic unit. Ohmmeter should
now show continuity.
9) Using ohmmeter, check continuity of diagnostic unit LED.
Connect ohmmeter leads to test lead and to pin under LED. Continuity
should exist in one direction only.
10) Turn ignition on. Measure voltage at ignition ECU
terminal No. 6 (Blue wire). Voltage should be about 12 volts. Turn
ignition off. Check continuity between ignition ECU connector
terminals No. 20 (Brown wire) and No. 14 (Black wire). Continuity
should be present.
11) Measure resistance between ground and ignition ECU
connector terminal No. 2 (Red/Black wire). See COOLANT TEMPERATURE
SENSOR RESISTANCE table under BENDIX REX-I. If reading is not correct,
test sensor directly to determine if fault is in sensor or wiring.
12) Check continuity between ignition ECU connector terminal
No. 7 (Orange wire) and ground. Ohmmeter should show continuity.
Depress accelerator until throttle switch opens slightly. Ohmmeter
reading should increase to infinity. If reading is not correct,
measure throttle switch resistance directly to determine if fault is
in switch or wiring. Adjust throttle switch if necessary. See
D - ADJUSTMENTS article in the ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section.
13) Measure voltage at ignition ECU connector terminal No. 8
(Yellow wire). Turn ignition on. Voltage should be about .1 volt. If
reading is not correct, check for open circuit between ignition ECU
and fuel injection ECU or for fault in fuel injection ECU.
14) Turn ignition off. Measure resistance between ignition
ECU connector terminals No. 10 (Red wire) and No. 23 (Blue wire).
Resistance should be 215-265 ohms. Ensure shield is connected to
ignition ECU terminal No. 11.
15) Disconnect knock sensor connector and place a jumper wire
between terminals. Check continuity between ignition ECU terminals No.
12 (Black wire) and No. 13 (Green wire). Ohmmeter should show
continuity. Ensure resistance to ground is infinity. If resistance is
too high (infinity), remove jumper wire and test each wiring lead. If
leads are intact, replace knock sensor.
16) Reconnect knock sensor connector. Reassemble and
reconnect ignition ECU connector.
17) Remove air cleaner assembly. Ensure ignition is off, and
disconnect power stage connector. Power stage is located at front of
left front fender panel. Remove connector dust cover. Connect
multimeter negative (-) lead to ground and positive (+) lead to
connector pin No. 4. Turn ignition on, and note voltage reading.
Voltage should be about 12 volts.
18) Leave multimeter attached, and crank starter motor.
Voltage should be at least 10.5 volts. If voltage is too low, check
battery and charging system. If voltage is not present, check Blue
wire from ignition ECU to ignition coil and power stage. Repair or
replace as necessary.
19) Check continuity of power stage ground by connecting
multimeter to power stage connector pin No. 2 and ground. Multimeter
should show continuity. Check ignition coil resistance. Connect
multimeter to power stage connector pins No. 1 and 4. Resistance
should be 0.6-1.0 ohm. If resistance is less than 0.6 ohm, check wires
for short circuit.
20) If wires are okay but resistance is still not 0.6-1.0
ohm, connect multimeter between ignition coil terminals No. 1
(Red/White wire) and No. 15 (Blue wire). If resistance is not 0.6-1.0
ohm, install a new ignition coil. If resistance is 0.6-1.0 ohm, check
continuity of wires between ignition coil and power stage connector
pins No. 1 and 4. Repair or replace as necessary.
21) Check shield (ground) wire between ignition ECU and power
stage. Shield wire is connected to power stage connector pin No. 3
(Gray wire). Repair if necessary. Ensure power stage is receiving

signal from ignition ECU. Disconnect wires from ignition coil terminal
No. 1. Connect multimeter positive (+) lead to power stage connector
pin No. 5 and negative (-) lead to ground.
22) Crank starter motor, and monitor voltage reading. Voltage
should pulsate between 0-2 volts. If voltage is within specification,
install a new power stage and recheck circuit. If voltage is very low
and/or irregular, check wiring between ignition ECU and crankshaft
position sensor. Repair or replace as necessary.
23) Turn ignition off. If no defects are found in previous
steps or if engine still malfunctions after repairs, install a new
ignition ECU. Recheck system as necessary.

BOSCH EZ129K
850 Non-Turbo
1) Disconnect coil wire from distributor cap. Put coil wire
next to ground and operate starter motor. If spark is present, check
distributor rotor and cap. If spark is not present, go to next step.
2) Connect voltmeter between ignition coil connector terminal
No. 15 (Red wire) and ground. Turn ignition on. If battery voltage is
not present, check voltage supply to ignition coil. If battery voltage
is present, turn ignition off and go to next step.
3) Connect voltmeter between ignition coil terminal No. 1
(Blue wire) and ground. Operate starter motor. If about .7-1.3 volts
are present, repeat test using new ignition coil. If about .7-1.3
volts are not present, turn ignition off and go to next step.
4) Disconnect engine speed sensor connector located close to
flywheel. Connect an ohmmeter between sensor terminals. If resistance
is about 200-400 ohms, go to next step and check Camshaft Position
Sensor (CMP) signal. If resistance is not about 200-400 ohms, replace
sensor.
NOTE:

Engine speed sensor is also known as Vehicle Speed Sensor
(VSS) or impulse sensor.

5) Remove intake hose. Bend aside rubber sleeve on CMP
connector. Connect voltmeter between connector terminal No. 2 and
ground. See Fig. 8. Operate starter motor. If voltage reading varies
between 0-5 volts, go to step 7). If voltage reading does not vary
between 0-5 volts, go to next step.

Fig. 8: Identifying Camshaft Position Sensor (CMP) Terminals
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.
6) Connect voltmeter between CMP connector terminal No. 3 and
ground. Turn ignition on. About 10 volts should be present. Turn
ignition off. Connect an ohmmeter between CMP connector terminal No. 1
and ground. Ohmmeter should show about zero ohms. If voltage supply
and ground are okay, repeat test using new CMP. If voltage supply and
ground are not okay, reconnect intake hose and go to step 9).
7) If voltage reading varied between 0-5 volts in step 5),
disconnect power stage connector at ignition coil. Bend back rubber
sleeve on connector. Check ground supply by connecting ohmmeter
between connector terminal No. 1 and ground. See Fig. 9. Ohmmeter
should indicate zero ohms. Check voltage supply by connecting

voltmeter between terminal No. 3 and ground. Turn ignition on. Battery
voltage should be present.

Fig. 9: Identifying Power Stage Connector Terminals
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.
8) Check power stage control signal by connecting voltmeter
between terminal No. 4 and ground. Operate starter motor. Voltmeter
should indicate .7-1.3 volts. If ground, voltage and control signal
are okay, repeat test using new power stage. If ground connection and
voltage are faulty, check wiring. If control signal is not present, go
to next step and check ECU input and output signals.
9) Connect Breakout Box (981 3190) and Adapter (981 3195) to
distributor ignition ECU. See Fig. 6. Turn ignition switch to OFF
position. Distributor ignition ECU is located in right side of engine
compartment. Remove ECU cover. Disconnect distributor ignition ECU
connector. Visually inspect all terminal connector sleeves to ensure
no terminals are damaged.
10) To install measuring unit, remove distributor ignition
ECU. Press adapter onto distributor ignition ECU and pull lead upward
through slot beside module. Press distributor ignition ECU, with
adapter connected, into connector in bottom of ECU box. Connect
measuring unit to adapter 60-pin connector.
11) Ensure ignition is off. To check ECU input and output
signals, connect ohmmeter between measuring unit terminal No. 20 and
ground, then between measuring unit terminal No. 29 and ground.
Ohmmeter should indicate about zero ohms in both cases.
12) Ensure ignition is off. Connect ohmmeter between
measuring unit terminals No. 20 and 2, and between measuring unit
terminals No. 20 and 15. Ohmmeter should indicate about zero ohms in
both cases.
13) Ensure ignition is off. Connect voltmeter between
measuring unit terminals No. 20 and 10. Battery voltage should be
present. Turn ignition on. Connect voltmeter between measuring unit
terminals No. 20 and 30. Battery voltage should be present.
14) Check engine speed sensor signal by connecting voltmeter
between measuring unit terminals No. 1 and 2. Operate starter motor.
Voltmeter should indicate 300-400 millivolts. If signal is not
present, check sensor. See code 1-3-1 diagnosis in
G - TESTS W/CODES article in the ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section.
If signal is present, go to next step and check Camshaft Position
Sensor (CMP) signal.
NOTE:

Engine speed sensor is also known as Vehicle Speed Sensor
(VSS) or impulse sensor.

15) Connect voltmeter between measuring unit terminals No. 20
and 4. Operate starter motor. Voltage should vary between 0-5 volts.
If voltage is okay, go to next step. If voltage is not okay, connect
voltmeter between measuring unit terminals No. 20 and 14. Voltmeter
should indicate about 10 volts. If voltage is present, but signal is
not present, repeat test using new CMP. If voltage is not present,
repeat test using new ECM.
16) If voltage was okay in step 15), connect voltmeter
between measuring unit terminals No. 20 and 43. Operate starter motor.

Voltage should indicate about 5-7 volts. If voltage is not present,
repeat test using ECU. If voltage is present, ignition system is
operating properly.

MOTRONIC 1.8
960 (Determining Whether Fault Is Fuel Or Ignition)
Using a volt-meter, check voltage at injectors when engine is
hot. If voltage is about 250-400 millivolts, fault is in ignition
system and/or an injector is blocked.
Checking Ground Connections
1) Turn ignition off. Remove fuse No. 24. Connect Breakout
Box (999-3070) to ECU. See Fig. 6. Connect ohmmeter between ground and
terminals No. 19, 24, 26, 30 and 48. Resistance should be about zero
ohms on all measurements.
2) Check power unit ground connections under each power unit.
Connect an ohmmeter between ground and terminal No. 4 on front power
unit connector and then on rear power unit connector.
3) Ohmmeter should indicate about zero ohms in both cases. If
ohmmeter does not indicate about zero ohms in both cases, check
connectors and wiring.
Voltage Supply To Ignition Coils
Turn ignition on. Connect volt-meter between ground and test
terminal at rear of engine. See Fig. 10. Voltmeter should show battery
voltage. If battery voltage is not present, check relay, wiring and
connectors.

Fig. 10: Locating Test Terminal At Rear Of Engine
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.
Cylinder Miss
Idle engine. Disconnect and reconnect one injector connector

at a time. If engine speed drops when connector is disconnected,
cylinder is okay.
Checking Firing Pulse At Ignition Coil
1) Make an adapter to fit between ignition coil connector and
test diode (999-5280). Connect test diode. See Fig. 11.
2) Start engine. Diode should flash if signal is present. If
signal is present, go to step 5). If no signal is present, connect
voltmeter between ground and control unit terminals connected to each
ignition coil.
3) If voltage is about 3.5 volts, an open circuit is present
between control unit and ignition coil. If voltmeter indicates 60-100
millivolts, connect diode tester with positive side connected to
control unit terminal for cylinder to be checked and to terminal No. 1
on corresponding ignition coil connector. Check components with leads
reversed.
4) Connect diode tester with positive side connected to
ground and to terminal No. 1 on ignition coil connector. Check
components with leads reversed. If fault is present, check wiring.
5) Remove coil and plug. Install another plug in cylinder.
Install original plug in ignition coil. Start engine and check for
spark. If no spark is present, check whether coil or plug is faulty.
Install plug in another coil. If spark is present, replace original
coil. If no spark is present, replace spark plug.

Fig. 11: Checking Firing Pulse At Ignition Coil
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.

MOTRONIC 4.3

850 Turbo (No Start)
1) Determine if fault is fuel or ignition. Check fuel
pressure. See FUEL PRESSURE under FUEL SYSTEM. If fuel pressure is not
as specified, repair fuel system as necessary. If fuel pressure is as
specified, fuel system is okay, check for spark. Go to next step.
2) Using a high output spark tester, check for spark at end
of one spark plug wire. If spark is not present, go to next step. If
spark is present, remove and inspect all spark plugs. Replace spark
plugs as necessary. Try to start engine. If engine starts, fault was
due to spark plugs. If engine does not start, check for defective mass
airflow sensor or coolant temperature sensor. See
K - SENSOR RANGE CHARTS article in the ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section.
3) Disconnect RPM sensor connector. Using an ohmmeter,
measure resistance between sensor connector terminals. If resistance
is 200-500 ohms, RPM sensor is okay. Go to next step. If resistance is
not 200-500 ohms, replace RPM sensor.
4) Turn ignition off. Install Breakout Box (981-3190) to ECU.
See Fig. 6. Turn ignition on. Set DVOM scale to measure frequency.
Connect a DVOM between terminals A21 and A42. Observe DVOM and operate
starter motor. If frequency is 1.5-2.0 Hz, go to next step. If
frequency is not 1.5-2.0 Hz, a fault exists in Camshaft Position (CMP)
sensor circuit. Repair circuit or replace defective CMP sensor and
retest.
5) Turn ignition off. Disconnect ignition coil 4-pin
connector. Measure voltage between ground and terminal No. 3 of
ignition coil connector. See Fig. 12. If battery voltage is present,
go to next step. If battery voltage is not present, check No. 4 fuse.
Replace fuse as necessary. If fuse is okay, locate and repair open in
wire between terminal No. 3 of ignition coil connector and fuse No. 4.

Fig. 12: Identifying Ignition Coil Connector Terminals (850 Turbo)
Courtesy of Volvo Cars of North America.
6) Turn ignition off. Wait 90 seconds. Measure resistance
between ground and terminal No. 1 of ignition coil connector. See

Fig. 12. If resistance is zero ohms, go to step 8). If resistance is
not zero ohms, go to next step.
7) Turn ignition off. Disconnect and inspect ignition coil 4pin connector. Clean or repair connector as necessary. Measure
resistance between ground and terminal No. 1 of coil connector. See
Fig. 12. If resistance is zero ohms, cleaning ignition coil connector
corrected fault. If resistance is not zero ohms, locate and repair
open in terminal No. 1 wire.
8) Turn ignition on. Set DVOM scale to measure frequency.
Measure frequency between ground and terminal No. 4 of ignition coil
connector while operating starter motor. See Fig. 12. If frequency is
8-10 Hz, circuit is okay. Go to step 11). If frequency is not 8-10 Hz,
go to next step.
9) Turn ignition on. Measure voltage between ground and
terminal No. 4 of ignition coil connector. If voltage is 0-1 volt, go
to next step. If voltage is not 0-1 volt, check wire between terminal
No. 4 of coil connector and terminal B11 of ECM connector for short to
voltage. Repair as necessary.
10) Turn ignition off. Wait 90 seconds. Disconnect ECM
connector. Measure resistance between ground and terminal No. 4 of
ignition coil connector. See Fig. 12. If resistance is infinite, check
for intermittent open in wire between terminal No. 4 of coil connector
and terminal B11 of ECM connector. If resistance is not infinite,
check for short to ground in wire between terminal No. 4 of coil
connector and terminal B11 of ECM connector.
11) Turn ignition off. Connect ignition coil connector. Turn
ignition on. Disconnect coil wire from distributor cap. Hold end of
coil wire about 3-5 mm from ground. Operate starter and check for
spark. If spark is present, go to next step. If spark is not present,
replace ignition coil and retest.
12) Reconnect ignition coil wire. Try to start engine. If
engine starts, fault was due to poor connection at ignition coil. If
engine does not start, check distributor cap and rotor for cracks,
moisture or dirt. Repair as necessary.

IDLE SPEED & IGNITION TIMING
If adjustable, ensure idle speed and ignition timing are set
to specification. See IDLE SPEED & CO LEVEL and IGNITION TIMING
tables. For idle speed adjustment procedures, see D - ADJUSTMENTS
article in the ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section. Ignition timing is
not adjustable.
IDLE SPEED & CO LEVEL TABLE (1)



Application

Idle RPM

(2) CO Level

850 ................. (3) 850 ....... (3)
940
Non-Turbo ............ 775 .............
Turbo ................ 750 .............
960 ................... 750 .............

.2-.8%
.4-.8%
.4-.8%
.4-.8%

(1) - Idle speed and CO level can only be checked,
not adjusted.
(2) - Measured upstream of catalytic converter with
oxygen sensor connected.
(3) - With cooling fan off.



IGNITION TIMING TABLE (Degrees BTDC @ RPM)



Application

(1) Timing

850
Non-Turbo ........................ 8-12 @ 750-850
Turbo ............................. 4-8 @ 750-850
940
Non-Turbo
EZ 116K (Bosch) .................... 12 @ 725-825
REX-I (Bendix) ..................... 10 @ 725-825
Turbo .................................. 12 @ 750
960 ...................................... 5 @ 750
(1) - Ignition timing is computer-controlled and
is not adjustable.


SUMMARY

If no faults were found while performing BASIC DIAGNOSTIC
PROCEDURES, proceed to appropriate G - TESTS W/ CODES article in the
ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section, see below. If no hard codes are found in
self-diagnostics, proceed to H - TESTS W/O CODES article in the
ENGINE PERFORMANCE Section for diagnosis by symptom (i.e., ROUGH IDLE,
NO START, etc.) or intermittent diagnostic procedures.
*
*
*
*

G
G
G
G

-

TESTS
TESTS
TESTS
TESTS

W/CODES - NON-TURBO
W/CODES - TURBO
W/CODES
W/CODES

